SSH hook
========

Sarus also includes the source code for a hook capable of enabling SSH
connections inside containers. The SSH hook is an executable binary that
performs different ssh-related operations depending on the argument it
receives from the runtime. For the full details about the implementation and
inner workings, please refer to the related :doc:`developer documentation
</developer/ssh>`.

Hook installation
-----------------

The hook is written in C++ and it will be compiled along with Sarus if the
``ENABLE_SSH=TRUE`` CMake option has been used when configuring the build (the
option is enabled by default). The Sarus installation scripts will also
automatically install the hook in the ``<CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX>/bin`` directory.

A custom SSH software (statically linked Dropbear) will also be built and installed in the
``<CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX>/dropbear`` directory. This directory must satisfy the
:ref:`security requirements <post-installation-permissions-security>` for critical
files and directories.

Sarus configuration
---------------------

The SSH hook must be configured to run as a **prestart** hook. It expects to
receive its own name/location as the first argument, and the string
``start-ssh-daemon`` as positional argument. In addition, the following
environment variables must be defined:

* ``HOOK_BASE_DIR``: Absolute base path to the directory where the hook will create and access the SSH keys.
  The keys directory will be located in ``<HOOK_BASE_DIR>/<username>/.oci-hooks/ssh/keys``.

* ``PASSWD_FILE``: Absolute path to a password file (PASSWD(5)).
  The file is used by the hook to retrieve the username of the user.

* ``DROPBEAR_DIR``: Absolute path to the location of the custom SSH software.

* ``"SERVER_PORT``: TCP port on which the SSH daemon will listen. This must be an unused
  port and is tipically set to a value different than 22 in order to avoid clashes with an SSH
  daemon that could be running on the host.

The following is an example of `OCI hook JSON configuration file
<https://github.com/containers/libpod/blob/master/pkg/hooks/docs/oci-hooks.5.md>`_
enabling the SSH hook:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "version": "1.0.0",
        "hook": {
            "path": "/opt/sarus/bin/ssh_hook",
            "env": [
                "HOOK_BASE_DIR=/home",
                "PASSWD_FILE=/opt/sarus/etc/passwd",
                "DROPBEAR_DIR=/opt/sarus/dropbear",
                "SERVER_PORT=15263"
            ],
            "args": [
                "ssh_hook",
                "start-ssh-daemon"
            ]
        },
        "when": {
            "annotations": {
                "^com.hooks.ssh.enabled$": "^true$"
            }
        },
        "stages": ["prestart"]
    }


Sarus support at runtime
------------------------

The command ``sarus ssh-keygen`` will call the hook without creating a
container, passing the appropriate arguments to generate dedicated keys to be
used by containers.

The ``com.hooks.ssh.enabled=true`` annotation that enables the hook is automatically
generated by Sarus if the ``--ssh`` command line option is passed to :program:`sarus run`.
